= fuzzy_match

Find a needle in a haystack based on string similarity (using the Pair Distance algorithm and Levenshtein distance) and regular expressions.

Replaces {loose_tight_dictionary}[https://github.com/seamusabshere/loose_tight_dictionary] because that was a confusing name.

== Quickstart

    >> require 'fuzzy_match'
    => true 
    >> FuzzyMatch.new(%w{seamus andy ben}).find('Shamus')
    => "seamus"

== String similarity matching

Uses {Dice's Coefficient}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dice's_coefficient] algorithm (aka Pair Distance).

If that judges two strings to be be equally similar to a third string, then Levenshtein distance is used. For example, pair distance considers "RATZ" and "CATZ" to be equally similar to "RITZ" so we invoke Levenshtein.

    >> require 'amatch'
    => true 
    >> 'RITZ'.pair_distance_similar 'RATZ'
    => 0.3333333333333333 
    >> 'RITZ'.pair_distance_similar 'CATZ'  # <-- pair distance can't tell the difference, so we fall back to levenshtein...
    => 0.3333333333333333 
    >> 'RITZ'.levenshtein_similar 'RATZ'
    => 0.75 
    >> 'RITZ'.levenshtein_similar 'CATZ'    # <-- which properly shows that RATZ should win
    => 0.5 

== Production use

Over 2 years in {Brighter Planet's environmental impact API}[http://impact.brighterplanet.com] and {reference data service}[http://data.brighterplanet.com].

== Haystacks and how to read them

The (admittedly imperfect) metaphor is "look for a needle in a haystack"

* needle - the search term
* haystack - the records you are searching (<b>your result will be an object from here</b>)

So, what if your needle is a string like <tt>youruguay</tt> and your haystack is full of <tt>Country</tt> objects like <tt><Country name:"Uruguay"></tt>?

    >> FuzzyMatch.new(countries, :read => :name).find('youruguay')
    => <Country name:"Uruguay">

== Rules (regular expressions)

You can improve the default matchings with regular expressions.

* Emphasize important words using <b>blockings</b> and <b>tighteners</b>
* Filter out stop words with <b>tighteners</b>
* Prevent impossible matches with <b>blockings</b> and <b>identities</b>
* Ignore words with <b>stop words</b>

=== Blockings

Setting a blocking of <tt>/Airbus/</tt> ensures that strings containing "Airbus" will only be scored against to other strings containing "Airbus". A better blocking in this case would probably be <tt>/airbus/i</tt>.

=== Tighteners

Adding a tightener like <tt>/(boeing).*(7\d\d)/i</tt> will cause "BOEING COMPANY 747" and "boeing747" to be scored as if they were "BOEING 747" and "boeing 747", respectively. See also "Case sensitivity" below.

=== Identities

Adding an identity like <tt>/(F)\-?(\d50)/</tt> ensures that "Ford F-150" and "Ford F-250" never match.

=== Stop words

Adding a stop word like <tt>THE</tt> ensures that it is not taken into account when comparing "THE CAT", "THE DAT", and "THE CATT"

== Case sensitivity

Scoring is case-insensitive. Everything is downcased before scoring. This is a change from previous versions. Your regexps may still be case-sensitive, though.

== Options

* <tt>read</tt>: how to interpret each record in the 'haystack', either a Proc or a symbol
* <tt>must_match_blocking</tt>: don't return a match unless the needle fits into one of the blockings you specified
* <tt>must_match_at_least_one_word</tt>: don't return a match unless the needle shares at least one word with the match
* <tt>first_blocking_decides</tt>: force records into the first blocking they match, rather than choosing a blocking that will give them a higher score
* <tt>gather_last_result</tt>: enable <tt>last_result</tt>

== Examples

Check out the tests.

== Speed (and who to thank for the algorithms)

If you add the amatch[http://flori.github.com/amatch/] gem to your Gemfile, it will use that, which is much faster (but {segfaults have been seen in the wild}[https://github.com/flori/amatch/issues/3]). Thanks {Flori}[https://github.com/flori]!

Otherwise, pure ruby versions of the string similarity algorithms derived from the {answer to a StackOverflow question}[http://stackoverflow.com/questions/653157/a-better-similarity-ranking-algorithm-for-variable-length-strings] and {the text gem}[https://github.com/threedaymonk/text/blob/master/lib/text/levenshtein.rb] are used. Thanks {marzagao}[http://stackoverflow.com/users/10997/marzagao] and {threedaymonk}[https://github.com/threedaymonk]!

== Authors

* Seamus Abshere <seamus@abshere.net>
* Ian Hough <ijhough@gmail.com>
* Andy Rossmeissl <andy@rossmeissl.net>

== Copyright

Copyright 2011 Brighter Planet, Inc.
